adds data converter stuff (#3004)
temporalio/documentation: docs/develop/typescript/data-encryption.mdx

### Operational Chain

In practice, these two components operate in a chain to handle data securely. Incoming data first passes through a Payload Converter through the `toPayload` method, turning application objects into Payloads. These Payloads are then processed by the Payload Codec through the `encode` method, which adjusts the Payload according to the required security or efficiency needs before it is sent to the Temporal Cluster.

The process is symmetric for outgoing data. Payloads retrieved from the Temporal Cluster first pass through the Payload Codec through the `decode` method, which reverses any transformations applied during encoding. Finally, the resulting Payload is converted back into an application object by the Payload Converter through the `fromPayload` method, making it ready for use within the application.

## Use custom payload conversion

Temporal SDKs provide a [Payload Converter](/dataconversion#payload-converter) that can be customized to convert a custom data type to a [Payload](/dataconversion#payload) and back.

> Implementing custom Payload conversion is optional.

Reviewer: I think this sentence is the same in the other SDKs but I wonder if we should rewrite it to emphasize that it's not just "optional," it's also not necessary to provide a new payload converter even if you're using a custom codec. I tried to rewrite I think at least Go and Java a bit to emphasize this, there might be examples to draw on there.

description: Learn how to create a custom Payload Converter in TypeScript with Temporal SDKs to handle non-JSON-serializable values, configure your Data Converter, and utilize protobufs and encryption seamlessly in your Workflows and Activities.
---

## Payload Converter and Payload Codec Summary

> This section will summarize the difference between a Payload Converter and Payload Codec.

Reviewer 2: Avoid modal auxilliary (will)

"This section summarizes" presents the information as immediately relevant and actionable.

Reviewer 2: I think it would help to add a summary to your intro to prep your readers for the main topic. For example: 

"Payloads are structured data transmitted between components in a Temporal installation. Sending payloads as plain text exposes security risks and increases bandwidth usage. Payload codecs and converters address these issues. Codecs provide a standardized format for data transmission, while converters handle the process of converting data into and out of that format. This page describes how to create custom Payload Converters in TypeScript to manage values that cannot be serialized with JSON. You'll configure a Data Converter for serialization and integrate Protobufs and encryption into your Workflows and Activities."

### Payload Converter

> Payload Converters are responsible for serializing application objects into a Payload and deserializing them back into application objects. A Payload, in this context, is a binary form suitable for network transmission that may include some metadata. This serialization process transforms an object (like those in JSON or Protobuf formats) into a binary format and vice versa. For example, an object might be serialized to JSON with UTF-8 byte encoding or to a protobuf binary using a specific set of protobuf message definitions.

Reviewer 2: I don't think you need to use "are responsible for". I think they "serialize application objects" (assuming objects is the correct phrase for data types here). You capitalized Payload, which is not a reserved Temporal term. I think the plural "into payloads, and deserialize them back" also makes the writing smoother. 

I like the definition of the payload. Consider splitting metadata into a separate thought. The next sentence "This serialization process" feels redundant to me. You might put the focus on JSON or Protobuf instead.  JSON, with its human-readable structure, is a common data interchange solution for web APIs due to its simplicity and ease of integration. Protobufs offer efficient binary serialized formats that reduce payload sizes and support fast processing. That's ideal for high-performance, etc etc. 

What I don't see is how this connects to the next line though. Serialization/deserialization is non-deterministic, so converters can live in Workflows, but encryption and other types of novel encoding, cannot, right? So there needs to be a second piece that can handle non-deterministic logic, which lives outside the Workflow, if I'm understanding this correctly. And it would help to have words here that explain the difference.

"Because of this" is I think better than "Consequently", we prefer "can't" to "cannot", "use" to "employ". And then I think a breath is called for. Maybe new sentence "This excludes (most) encryption because encryption is almost always non-determ."

And then there's the missing piece that leads to "Well, what do you do with the part that can't live inside the Workflow", a transition that gets you from converters to codecs.

Due to their operation within the Workflow context, Payload Converters run inside the Workflow sandbox. Consequently, Payload Converters cannot access external services or employ non-deterministic modules, which excludes most types of encryption due to their non-deterministic nature.

### Payload Codec

> Payload Codecs transform one Payload into another, converting binary data to a different binary format. Unlike Payload Converters, Payload Codecs do not operate within the Workflow sandbox. This allows them to execute operations that can include calls to remote services and the use of non-deterministic modules, which are critical for tasks such as encrypting Payloads, compressing data, or offloading large payloads to an object store. Payload Codecs can also be implemented as a Codec Server (which will be described later on).

Reviewer 2: This is where I'd get more confused because serialization is also about converting binary data to a different binary format because all data is binary. Whether you're using compression/decompression or encryption, they all (potentially) fall under the non-determ umbrealla. Oh, and you mention some really good examples here of what those tasks are. 

I'm not sure what our group's position is on forward references ("which will be described") but I've had my hand slapped a lot about that.

### Operational Chain

> In practice, these two components operate in a chain to handle data securely. Incoming data first passes through a Payload Converter through the `toPayload` method, turning application objects into Payloads. These Payloads are then processed by the Payload Codec through the `encode` method, which adjusts the Payload according to the required security or efficiency needs before it is sent to the Temporal Cluster.

Reviewer 2: Maybe stating or explaining why data security is important to many of our adopters before just jumping into chaining? And then instead just jump in "chaining these components allows ..." Also, avoid passive voice, as part of our in-house style, and you can say Payloads instead of "These payloads" and rework the sentence so the actor is the Payload Codec type, which uses its `encode` method to process the payload. The work applied depends on the security or efficiency needed before sending it onto the (I assume) Temporal Service.

> The process is symmetric for outgoing data. Payloads retrieved from the Temporal Cluster first pass through the Payload Codec through the `decode` method, which reverses any transformations applied during encoding. Finally, the resulting Payload is converted back into an application object by the Payload Converter through the `fromPayload` method, making it ready for use within the application.

Reviewer 2: A figure might help to show the parallel and reversed process. Also you're using specific calls while you're still introducing the process. Moving them out both makes the intro easier to read and also supports porting to other SDKs (I don't know where this page lives or how it will be or not be ported)

## Payload Codec

> API documentation: [PayloadCodec](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/interfaces/common.PayloadCodec)

> The default `PayloadCodec` does nothing. To create a custom one, we implement the following interface:

Reviewer 2: Avoid using "we". "We" can imply you're speaking from a position of authority or shared experience. Prefer "you". The person taking action is the reader.

```ts
interface PayloadCodec {
  /**
   * Encode an array of {@link Payload}s for sending over the wire.
   * @param payloads May have length 0.
   */
  encode(payloads: Payload[]): Promise<Payload[]>;

  /**
   * Decode an array of {@link Payload}s received from the wire.
   */
  decode(payloads: Payload[]): Promise<Payload[]>;
}
```

## Use custom payload conversion

Temporal SDKs provide a [Payload Converter](/dataconversion#payload-converter) that can be customized to convert a custom data type to a [Payload](/dataconversion#payload) and back.

> The order in which your encoding Payload Converters are applied depending on the order given to the Data Converter.

Reviewer 2: Also, the sentence doesn't really make sense "applied depending on". Maybe flip the sentence around? The Data Converter applies the Payload Converters in a specific order, which you pass to it?" or something? It's confusing.

> You can set multiple encoding Payload Converters to run your conversions.

Reviewer 2: Set where? Add them to the Data Converter? Create a chain?

> When the Data Converter receives a value for conversion, the value gets passes through each Payload Converter in sequence until the converter that handles the data type does the conversion. You will explore more in detail now. You will explore more in detail now.

Reviewer 2: Does the value enter the Data Converter? Does a value get sent to the Data converter?  After sending a value to the Data Converter, the converter passes it through each of its Payload Converters (do these live in a queue?) until the "converter that handles the data type" which one? Both Data and Payload are converters. 

You will explore more in detail now is hard to understand. Maybe "In the following sections, you'll explore this process in more detail?" And the words are duplicated, the last two sentences on the line.

## Composite Data Converters

Use a [Composite Data Converter](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/classes/common.CompositePayloadConverter) to apply custom, type-specific Payload Converters in a specified order. Defining a new Composite Data Converter is not always necessary to implement custom data handling. You can override the default Converter with a custom Codec, but a Composite Data Converter may be necessary for complex Workflow logic.

A Composite Data Converter can include custom rules created, and it can also
leverage the default Data Converters built into Temporal. In fact, the default
Data Converter logic is implemented internally in the Temporal source as a
Composite Data Converter. It defines these rules in this order:

```typescript
export class DefaultPayloadConverter extends CompositePayloadConverter {
  constructor() {
    super(
      new UndefinedPayloadConverter(),
      new BinaryPayloadConverter(),
      new JsonPayloadConverter()
    );
  }
}
```

> The order of applying the Payload Converters is important. During

Reviewer 2: Under what circumstances is the payload null? What does that tell you? How do you handle it?

serialization, the Data Converter tries the Payload Converters in that specific
order until a Payload Converter returns a non-null Payload.

To replace the default Data Converter with a custom `CompositeDataConverter`, use the following:

```
export const payloadConverter = new CompositePayloadConverter(
  new UndefinedPayloadConverter(),
  new EjsonPayloadConverter()
);
```

You can do this in its own `payload-conterter.ts` file for example.

> In the code snippet above, a converter is created that first attempts to handle `null` and `undefined` values. If the value isn't `null` or `undefined`, the EJSON serialization logic written in the `EjsonPayloadConverter` is then used. The Payload Converter is then provided to the Worker and Client.

Reviewer 2: The voice of previous editors says "previous" not "above" for some reason, although if you think about it, there's no way this is being split onto separate pages (like a book) so maybe that doesn't apply here.

> Here is the Worker code:

Reviewer 2: Maybe move the sentence below the code fencing into this sentence? This worker serializes and deserializes...?

```typescript
const worker = await Worker.create({
  workflowsPath: require.resolve("./workflows"),
  taskQueue: "ejson",
  dataConverter: {
    payloadConverterPath: require.resolve("./payload-converter"),
  },
});
```

With this code, you now ensure that the Worker serializes and deserializes Workflow and Activity inputs and outputs using your EJSON-based logic, along with handling undefined values appropriately.

Here is the Client:

```typescript
const client = new Client({
  dataConverter: {
    payloadConverterPath: require.resolve("./payload-converter"),
  },
});
```

> You can now use a variety of data types in arguments.

Reviewer 2: This is important because...?

Implementing custom Payload conversion is optional.
It is needed only if the [default Data Converter](/dataconversion#default-data-converter) does not support your custom values.

The order in which your encoding Payload Converters are applied depending on the order given to the Data Converter.
You can set multiple encoding Payload Converters to run your conversions.
When the Data Converter receives a value for conversion, it passes through each Payload Converter in sequence until the converter that handles the data type does the conversion. You will explore more in detail now.

## Composite Data Converters

Use a [Composite Data Converter](https://typescript.temporal.io/api/classes/common.CompositePayloadConverter) to apply custom, type-specific Payload Converters in a specified order. Defining a new Composite Data Converter is not always necessary to implement custom data handling. You can override the default Converter with a custom Codec, but a Composite Data Converter may be necessary for complex Workflow logic.

> A Composite Data Converter can be comprised of custom rules that you created, and it can also

Reviewer 3: passive voice.

leverage the default Data Converters built into Temporal. In fact, the default
Data Converter logic is implemented internally in the Temporal source as a
Composite Data Converter. It defines these rules in this order:

> ```typescript

Author: It comes from the course repo

export class DefaultPayloadConverter extends CompositePayloadConverter {
  constructor() {
    super(
      new UndefinedPayloadConverter(),
      new BinaryPayloadConverter(),
      new JsonPayloadConverter()
    );
  }
}
```

> The order in which the Payload Converters are applied is important. During

Reviewer 3: first sentence is passive-voice

serialization, the Data Converter tries the Payload Converters in that specific
order until a Payload Converter returns a non-null Payload.

To replace the default Data Converter with a custom `CompositeDataConverter`, use the following:

```
export const payloadConverter = new CompositePayloadConverter(
  new UndefinedPayloadConverter(),
  new EjsonPayloadConverter()
);
```

## How to use a custom payload converter in TypeScript {#custom-payload-conversion}

To support custom Payload conversion, create a [custom Payload Converter](/dataconversion#composite-data-converters) and configure the Data Converter to use it in your Client options.

> Custom Payload Converters can be used to change how application objects get serialized to binary Payload. To handle custom data types that are not natively JSON-serializable (e.g., `BigInt`, `Date`, or binary data), you can create a custom Payload Converter. A Custom Payload Converter is responsible for converting your custom data types to a payload format that Temporal can manage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use Custom Payload Converters to change how application objects get serialized to binary Payload. To handle custom data types that are not natively JSON-serializable (e.g., `BigInt`, `Date`, or binary data), you can create a custom Payload Converter. A Custom Payload Converter is responsible for converting your custom data types to a payload format that Temporal can manage.
```

recasted to active voice

}
```

This custom converter should include logic for both serialization (`toPayload`) and deserialization (`fromPayload`), handling your specific data types or serialization format. The method `toPayload` returns a Payload object, which is used to manage and transport serialized data. The method `fromPayload` returns the deserialized data. This ensures that the data returned is in the same format as it was before serialization, allowing it to be used directly in the application.

> 2. Configure the Data Converter.  To send values that are not JSON-serializable like a `BigInt` or `Date`, provide the custom Data Converter to the Client and Worker as described in the [Composite Data Converters](#composite-data-converters) section.

Reviewer 2: Extra spaces here? 

Also might help to introduce a reason before sending those values. Some values cannot be expressed in JSON primitives like BigInt or Date. To send values like these, which are not JSON-serializable, ....
